# Lecture 2

## Theorem (Kleene's Theorem)

1. A language is regular if and only if it can be obtained from finite languages by applying the three operations:

   - Union
   - Concatenation
   - Repetition

   A finite number of times.



2. The set of regular languages over some alphabet $\sum$ is defined inductively.

Base Case:

- $\empty$ is a regular language
- $\{\epsilon\}$ is a regular language 
- $\{a\}$ is a regular language for each $a\in \sum$. interpreting $a$ as string of length $1$.

Inductive Step:

We can build up languages using a few basic operations:

- if $L_1,L_2$ are regular then $L_1\cup L_2$ is regular
- if $L_1,L_2$ are regular then $L_1L_2$ is regular.
- If $L$ is regular, then $L^*=\cup_{n \geq 0} L^n$ is regular.
- If $L$ is regular, then so is $\bar{L}=\Sigma^* \backslash L$.

Regular languages are closed under operations of union, concatenation and Kleene star. 



3. Lemma: Let $L_1, L_2, \ldots$, be regular languages over alphabet $\Sigma$. Then the language $\cup_{i=1}^{\infty} L_i$ is not necessarily regular. 

### Example 1

Suppose $L_i=\{0^i1^i\}$ a single string. 

$L = \cup_{i=1}^{\infin}L_i=\{0^n1^n| n\ge0\}$. That is not a regular language. 



**Important: Any language generated by a finite sequence of such operation is regular. The number of operation do to regular languge has to be finite. in order to get a regular language. **



4. Lemma: Every finite language $L$ is regular. 



### Example 2

$L_1=\left\{0^i \mid i=0,1, \ldots, \infty\right\} .$ The language $L_1$ is regular. T/F?

Yes, it is a regular language, even if $L_1$ will have infinte element, but $L_1 $is comes from $L=\{0\}$ by doing Kleene star. remember the kleene's theorem,   regular language obtained from finite languages by applying the three operations in a finite number of times.  



### Example 3

$L_2=\left\{0^{17 i} \mid i=0,1, \ldots, \infty\right\}$. The language $L_2$ is regular. $\mathrm{T} / \mathrm{F}$ ?

Yes, it is regular language. $L_0=\{0\}$ $L_{17\ 0} = L_0L_0...L_0$ times $L_0$ 17 times. and $L_2=(L_{17\ 0 })^*$. So in this question we have a regular language $L_0$ and we use finite time of three operations. So this language is regular language. 



### Example 4

$L_3=\left\{0^i \mid i\right.$ is divisible by 2,3, or 5$\} . L_3$ is regular. $T / F ?$ 

Yes, it is regular language. Since $L_0=\{0\}$, and suppose $L_{\frac{i}{2}}=\{L_0L_0\}^*,L_{\frac{i}{3}}=\{L_0L_0L_0\}^* L_{\frac{i}{5}}=\{L_0L_0L_0L_0L_0\}^*$. and we can clearly know all three of them are regular language. Then $L_3=L_{\frac{i}{2}}\cup L_{\frac{i}{3}}\cup L_{\frac{i}{5}}$. which we use finite time of union operations. So $L_3$ is also a regular language. 





## Regular Expression

1. A **regular expression** $r$ over an alphabet $\sum$ is one of the following:

Base Case:

- $\empty$ denotes the language $\empty$
- $\epsilon$ denotes the language $\{\epsilon \}$
- $a$ denotes the language $\{a\}$

Inductive Case: if $r_1$ and $r_2$ are regular expression denoting languages $R_1$ and $R_2$ respectively then,

- $\left(r_1+r_2\right)$ denotes the language $R_1 \cup R_2$
- $\left(r_1 \cdot r_2\right)=r_1 \cdot r_2=\left(r_1 r_2\right)$ denotes the language $R_1 R_2$
- $\left(\mathrm{r}_1\right)^*$ denotes the language $R_1^*$



2. Multiple regular expression can denote the same language. 

### Example 5

$(0+1)$ and $(1+0)$ denotes same language $\{0,1\}$



3. Two regular expression $r_1$ and $r_2$ are equivalent if $L\left(r_1\right)=L\left(r_2\right)$



4. **Superscript**: For convenience, define $r^+=rr^*$. Hence if $L(\mathbf{r})=R$ then $L\left(\mathbf{r}^{+}\right)=R^{+}$ 

   $r^+$ simply means without $\epsilon $.



### Example 6

$(0+1)^*$

it represent all binary string. 



### Example 7

$(0+1)^* 001(0+1)^*$

all string with $001$ as substring. 



### Example 8

$0^*+\left(0^* 10^* 10^* 10^*\right)^*$

with number of $1's$ divisible by 3.



### Example 9

All string that end in 1011.

$(0+1)^*\cdot(1011)$



### Example 10

All string execpt $11$. 

$\epsilon + 0+1+00+01+10+(0+1)^3(0+1)^*$



### Example 11

All strings that do not contain $000$ as a subsequence. 

$1^*(\epsilon+0) 1^*(\epsilon+0) 1^*$



### Example 12

All string that do not contain the substring $10$

$0^*1^*$

